Alex, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
- Thank you.
- Yeah, it's fantastic to have you here.
You have so many cool open source projects out there.
We're here to talk about any IO,
but actually several of them I've covered on Python Bytes
on the other podcasts that I run.
And we've talked about SQL Code Gen and TypeGuard.
And I didn't associate that with you specifically
and back over to NEIO.
So yeah, a lot of cool projects you got going on there.
- Yeah, too many actually.
I managed to hand over a couple of them to other people,
Seaboard 2 and Sphinx Autodoc type hints,
because I'm really stressed thing at the moment.
I barely have time for all of the projects
that I'm maintaining.
- I can imagine.
That's, you know, how do you juggle all that?
- I know it's, I'm sure you have a full-time job
and you have all these different projects, right?
- Yes, yes.
Basically I get the equivalent of a writer's block
from time to time.
So when that happens, I just either don't try to code at all
or I just switch to another project.
- Yeah, true.
If you're talking about type hints versus async programming,
like if you're stuck on one,
you probably are not stuck on the other, right?
- Yeah.
- Yeah, interesting.
Well, we're gonna have a lot of fun
talking about all of them.
I doubt there's gonna be any writer's block
or speaker's block here, podcaster's block.
It'll be good.
We'll have a good time chatting about it
and sharing with everyone.
Before we get to that though, let's hear your story.
How'd you get into programming in Python?
- I got into programming at the age of eight.
It was on an MSX compatible machine.
I started with BASIC, as so many others did.
I did some simple text-based games at first,
just playing around.
At some point, I got Commodore 128,
and I did some simple demos, graphical demos with it.
Then I got an Amiga 500.
- Oh yeah, the Amigas were cool.
They were special.
- Yeah.
So I doubled in almost basic
than other kinds of tools also.
I don't really remember that much of it.
Then at some point I did something with Mac,
that is macOS classic, there was this tool called HyperCard.
It's a precursor for Flash, basically.
So that's something I did some things with,
simple games and whatnot.
- Yeah, okay.
- Then, skipping forward a bit,
I got into PC programming, like C, C++,
mostly C. And then I think it was in the latter half of 2005.
No, actually it was much earlier, 1999.
I started with Perl, hated it.
Then I think the next step was in 2005 when I got to learn PHP.
Hated that too.
And then finally in 2007 I got to know Python.
Then that was love at first sight, really.
At that point it was I think 2.5 and of course I stuck with it.
I did some Java professionally for a while, but I never really got to love it.
It had this corporate, industrial feeling to it.
I'm not dressed up enough to program my Java today.
Let me go get my tie.
I'll be right back.
Yeah.
So Python was really cool.
When I started learning it, my first practical application
I made in, what, 30 minutes after starting to learn it.
So it's really staggeringly easy to learn.
And that's one thing I love about it.
It really is. It's one of the few languages you can be really successful with, with a
partial understanding of what's going on. You don't even have to know what a class is
or what modules are. You can just write a few functions in a file.
It's almost like it's English.
Yeah, indeed. Very cool. Raul out in the audience says, "Third time's a charm." The third language
you found the one you like there. Excellent. And how about now? What are you doing these days?
I've been working for several years on a project, a very complicated project where,
this is always a hard part to describe it. It's a sort of working wellness application.
I'm part of a bigger team. I'm the lead backend developer. It collects IoT data and visualizes it
and it provides all sorts of peripheral services to it. So this is the first time I really had to
spread my wings with databases. Oh yeah, okay. What technologies are you using there?
Well, on the back end we use timescale DB, which is a post-credential extension.
This is for storing that time series data.
Then on the back end, we use my framework called Asphalt.
I don't know if you've encountered that one. I think it's really cool,
But it's not in widespread use.
It's not a web framework per se.
It's more like a generic framework
where you can compose applications
from a mix of premade components and custom-made components.
What's it called?
Sorry?
Asphalt.
What was it called?
Asphalt, like the road?
Yes.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
Yeah, that's no, no, no, no, no.
Guessing no.
I did a search and I just found a snake.
Yeah, that's a good thing.
That Python, the snake on some asphalt road.
Yeah, you gotta be careful here.
Okay.
Is it a little bit like Flask or what's the?
Well, Flask is a web framework.
This is a generic framework.
You can build any kind of applications with it.
Doesn't have to be involved with web.
You can either write command line--
>> I see, any network thing, not necessarily HTTP.
So it could be UDP or it could be just--
>> It doesn't even have to do any networking at all.
You can build command line tools with it.
And you can just have this mix of components
and the YAML configuration to give settings to them all.
I think this really would require a whole different session.
It does sound like it would be a whole different session,
but this is news to me and very interesting.
- Yeah, I haven't really advertised much.
I'm working on version five at the moment,
which does incorporate any I/O support and all the,
it brings the tech up to date with the current standards.
- Okay, yeah, this looks very asynchronous based.
It's an async I/O based micro framework
for network oriented applications, it says.
- Yeah.
- Built upon UV loop, which is, you know,
how all the good Python async things
seem to be backed these days.
So it has a lot of sort of modern Python features.
It's got async I/O, it's got UV loop,
it's got type hints, those sorts of things.
When you started in Python in 2007, none of those existed.
How do you see the recent changes to Python
in the last five years or so?
- I would say that Python has been developing
at an incredible speed and I really love it.
So many useful stuff coming out with every release.
- I agree.
>>Yeah, basically from 3.5 to 3.8 or something.
There were just so many amazing features that came out then.
And now we're seeing these libraries built upon it, right?
>>Right.
All right, well, let's transition over
to our main topic that we're going to talk about, which
is what I reached out to you for,
not realizing the other two interesting projects that I
already gave a shout out to are also yours.
We'll get to those if we got time.
So with Python in 3.4, we had AsyncIO introduced,
the actual frameworks that supported that.
And then when it really came into its own was Python 3.5,
when the async and await keywords were added to the language.
And Python came out of the box with some support for great async programming.
But then there are these other libraries that developed on top of that
of that to maybe make certain use cases easier
or add new capabilities and any IO falls
into that realm, right?
- Yeah, so before we talk about any IO,
we should talk about Trio.
Have you heard about Trio?
- Yes, I have heard about Trio.
I even had Nathaniel on the show,
but it's been a little while.
That was back in 2018, I talked to Nathaniel.
Nathaniel Smith. So there's probably quite a few changes since then, actually.
Yeah.
Yeah, let's talk about Trio.
Yeah, actually the last version of Trio was released just yesterday.
So, the thing about NEIO is that it's an effort to basically bring the Trio features to AsyncIO LAN.
So Trio is fundamentally incompatible with AsyncIO.
There is a compatibility layer called Trio AsyncIO,
but it's far from perfect.
So what any I/O does really is allow users to,
allow developers to add these features from Trio
to their AsyncIO applications and libraries one by one
one without making a commitment.
For example, at my work, I use any I/O for just a handful of tasks.
I think we should talk about the features.
So one thing at least I should say to dispel any confusion is that the Trio and AsyncIO are both
like top-level Async frameworks in that they provide an event loop and in the IEO does not.
So it's kind of a meta Async framework. So it transforms on top of the different frameworks.
Yeah, so it builds on top of these frameworks and their underlying primitives.
Yeah, so for people who are not familiar, Trio adds things like this concept of grouped tasks.
So normally in AsyncIO, you start one task, you start another. They're kind of unrelated, but
even if they're conceptually solving parts of the same problem.
And with Trio, you can do things like create what's called a nursery,
and then you can have them all run, or you could potentially cancel
unstarted tasks. And there's other coordination type of operations as well.
That's the kind of stuff that Trio adds.
Yeah, so the point of any I/O is, as I said, to bring these Trio features
to asyncio.
Right.
It's because when you do Trio, it's an end to end async stack,
which means you are basically have to be built for Trio, right?
It's like if I have, let's say, HTPX, it's I don't know how easy it is to integrate
that.
Those kind of things that are expecting an asyncio event loop over into Trio.
Yeah, so I already have my own event loop running.
and it's hard to coordinate the tasks, right?
- So if you are talking about HTTPX,
it had a TRIO and async I/O backends.
Now it defaults to the any I/O backend.
So it runs by default on both.
- Okay.
- So about any I/O features,
It provides a trio like task groups on top of AsyncIO.
This in here, we should mention that Python 3.11
has its own concept of a task group,
but the mechanics are quite a bit different.
That requires a bit of explaining.
- Yeah, how's it work here?
The thing is the async I/O task group,
so not this one, but the standard library task groups,
which are in Puzzle 3.11,
they basically just start normal async I/O task,
and you can cancel individual tasks
with using the task objects
that come out of the create task method.
What sets any I/O task groups apart
from async I/O task groups is the way cancellation is done.
And since any I/O goes designed based on TRIO,
when you do start soon,
it doesn't return any task object that you can cancel.
Instead, cancellation is done via so-called cancel scopes.
So each task group has its own cancel scope.
If you cancel that,
you basically cancel all the underlying tasks.
But it goes even deeper because,
okay, this is a bit complicated, so bear with me.
Cancellation is not done on a per-task basis,
but on the per cancel scope basis.
So you can have cancel scopes nested
so that if you start a task and it starts a cancel scope,
you can just cancel that scope
and it cancels everything up to that point.
- Okay, so like if I call a task,
if I create a task and then somewhere inside
for it to do its job,
it also creates a task.
Those can be grouped into the same basic scope, right?
So there's not--
- Yeah, you don't even have to start another task.
You don't even have to start another task.
So if you cancel a cancel scope,
then anything you basically await on
gets automatically canceled, bam.
Which is, this is called level cancellation.
in contrast to the edge cancellation mechanism
employed by any SIGIO.
In edge cancellation, you just cancel the task once
and it gets a canceled error erased in the task.
So you can ignore it,
which is by the way, a bad thing to do,
but then the task won't be canceled again, usually.
There are exceptions to this which are a topic of debate in the community.
But the cancelled scope basically, they define boundaries for cancellation.
So if you say you cancel a task group's cancelled scope, only the tasks started from that task
group are cancelled.
So when those tasks return back,
so all the tasks are done,
then the code just goes forward
from this async context manager.
Basically, when all the tasks are done,
then however they end,
unless some raised exceptions,
that's a different situation.
If they were either canceled or successful,
then the code just goes forward
to the all tasks finished part.
Okay.
- This is really neat.
The other thing that's standing out here
as I think about these task groups.
So for those of you listening,
you can just create an async with block
to create the task group.
And then in there, you can just say task group.start soon
and give it a bunch of async methods to start running.
Right?
The thing that's cool about this is it automatically waits for them all to be finished at the end
of that context manager, the with block.
The standard library task groups work the same way, actually.
Okay.
And those are in 3.11?
Yes.
Uh-huh.
Which is not out yet, but October is coming very soon.
Yep.
We'll see how the mechanism will work.
There's a new mechanism for cancellation called uncancellation of tasks.
It's not really battle-tested.
It's something that was added fairly late in the game to 3.11, so it's not yet clear
if there are edge cases where it fails totally.
This is also a debated topic in the community.
- Sure, the other thing here that I wanted to ask you about
is you don't say like create task.
- Right, so this is the model.
- You say start soon.
Why do you say, what's this like uncertainty about?
Tell us about that.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So start soon, it's actually,
it does the same thing as create a task
because creating task doesn't start running it right away.
It starts only running it on the,
perhaps on the next iteration of the event loop.
- Right, or maybe not.
Maybe the event loop's all backed up.
Maybe it's the, you know, it takes a while, right?
- Yeah, so it's basically the same as loop.callSoon.
So you schedule a callback.
That's all that tasks are.
They are callbacks with bells and whistles.
So start soon is modeled based on Trio,
but I should mention that there's also a method called start
which works a bit differently.
Yeah, this showcases the start method.
So this is very, very useful,
which this feature is not present
in the standard library task groups.
So basically it's very useful starting a background service
that you need to know that the task has actually started
before you move on.
- Right.
So an example that you have in the docs here
is you create a task group
and the first thing is to start a service
that's listening on a port.
The next thing is to talk to that service on the port.
- Yeah.
- And if you just say, kick them both off,
who knows if that thing is actually gonna be ready
by the time you try to talk to it.
- Exactly.
This is something I use in practice all the time.
- And this is different than what you would get
just with the async.io create task or whatever, right?
- Yeah, and even the new task group feature
doesn't have this.
- So I guess you could, in the standard library,
you could start it and then you would have to just wait,
you know, wait for it to finish,
and then you would carry on,
but it's like two steps, right?
- The workaround would be to create a future,
then pass that to the task and then wait on that future.
So it's a bit cumbersome.
And then you have to remember to use a try,
except in case that that task happens to fail,
otherwise you end up waiting on the future forever.
- I really like this idea.
Now, the other thing that I don't see
in your examples here,
where I'm creating a task group and starting these tasks
and waiting for them to finish
is management of the event loop.
If I was doing it with my code, I'd probably
have to create a group or a loop and then
call some functions on it.
And here, you just use any I/O. Where's
the event loop being managed?
I'm not sure.
What do you mean?
Well, a lot of times when you're doing async stuff,
you have to go and actually create an async event loop
and then use the loop directly.
And you're working with a loop for various things.
>> Well, there is that run command at the bottom.
>> Yeah, yeah, OK.
So basically, you just say any I/O dot run.
>> Or async I/O dot run.
>> OK, and even though I'm using the any I/O task groups,
I can still just--
I can mix and match this with more standard async I/O
movement loops?
>> That's the premise.
So you can just ease into it little by little.
>> Nice. Yeah. So for example,
if I have a FastAPI web app,
and FastAPI is in charge of managing the event loop,
and I've got an async API endpoint,
I could still go and use
an Any.IO task group and get all the benefits in there.
>> Yeah. I should mention that FastAPI also depends on Any.IO.
Oh, really?
Okay.
How interesting.
Yeah, I've seen Sebastian Ramirez talking about some little functions that he wrote.
He's like, "I would love to see these just get back into any I/O.
I didn't realize that FastAPI itself was using them."
Yeah.
Okay, so very useful.
We've got these task groups.
We've got the concept of cancellation.
one that's not exactly cancellation, but is sort of cancellation, is timeouts.
Do you want to talk about how you do timeouts?
>> Yeah, I meant to talk about that. As I recall, in Python 3.11, there is a similar
construct. I think it was with timeout or something similar. I don't remember, really.
But what this move on after does is it creates a cancel scope with a timeout.
So basically this is a very practical use of cancel scopes.
What it does is it starts a timer and after one second it cancels this scope.
So anything under that gets cancelled.
So in this case, just that the sleep command gets cancelled
and then the task just keeps going.
So that way you described it before, it sounds like if there was a bunch of tasks running,
if any of them try to await something, they're also going to get cancelled.
Is that right?
In this case, you mean?
Yeah. No, only only the part that is within the week block.
Right. Well, that's what I mean. But if you had done multiple tasks within like the move on after,
right, like I say, I try to talk to the database, it's an inserted record. And I try to call an API
in the database times. Right, so so whatever whatever is awaiting when.
Alex, did we lose you?
[AUDIO OUT]
Hey, Alex.
Are you here now?
Yes.
Yes, yes, I do hear you now.
Yeah, sorry.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
Yeah, my headphones, they fizzle out sometimes.
Sorry about that.
Yeah, no worries.
I'm trying to get them back.
Actually, there's a pretty serious echo.
Can you turn down the speakers, maybe?
OK, are you hearing me now?
I hear you good.
And I don't hear myself.
Perfect.
Sorry.
Yeah, let's carry on.
We'll just edit that out.
Sorry, YouTube, it's live.
It's going to stay there.
But for the other audio, we'll edit that out.
OK, so you were telling me, but what
happens if I have multiple things going on
and it times out?
Yeah, so within a single move on after block,
you can only have one thing going on,
which is the wait here.
So even if you start multiple tasks from that task group,
they are not enclosed within that cancel scope.
I realize that cancel scopes are a complex and difficult
concept, and I don't think I can adequately explain them.
But I hope that this will at least shed some light
into them.
Yeah.
Well, it's a really cool idea because your code could--
it's async, so it's not as bad as if you were to lock up
waiting for an API call or something that's
going to time out on the network eventually
after a really long time.
But it's still-- you don't want it to clog up your code, right?
You want to just say, sorry, this isn't working.
Yeah.
One place where I often use constructs like this
is finalization. So when you are closing up things, then you can use this move on effort
to set a timeout for closing resources. Yeah, that makes sense because you want to be a good
citizen in terms of your app and release the resources as soon as possible, like a database
connection or a file handle. But if it's not working, you know, like, "Oh, I made a try at
it after a second. We're done." Exactly. And also, I should mention that this is where NEI's biggest
caveat lies. It is in finalization. I often run into problems with the cancel scopes because
The thing with cancel scopes is that when you run code within a cancel scope and that scope gets
cancelled, then anything awaiting on anything within that cancel scope is always cancelled
time after time. So you cannot wait on anything as long as you are within the cancel scope.
and async.io code is not expecting that.
So it might have a final clause where it does await,
say, connection.close.
But that also gets canceled if you are within an NEIO cancel scope.
And it's one of the biggest practical issues with NEIO right now.
And we are trying to figure out the solution for that.
just something to keep in mind when you are writing your stuff.
But yeah, that is tricky, right? Because you say, well, I'm going to try to call this
this web service and I'm going to wait it. And if it fails, you know, probably internally,
what you want to do is close the network connection as well.
Right. But if you try to await closing networks, that connection.
Yeah. So what happens there? Does it eventually just get cleaned up by the garbage collector?
Well, garbage collector doesn't work that well with async stuff because the destructors could be called in any thread.
So you can't rely on that. You can't do any async callbacks in the destructor.
So it's a good idea not to try any of that and instead just raise a resource warning.
So if you're writing any I/O where code, you would have either this shielded cancel scope,
or better yet, a move on after which shield true.
What does that do?
That at least temporarily protects the task from cancellation.
So let's say you have move on after say five and we shield true.
It means that even if the auto-cancel scope is canceled,
your actual task will start running until it exits
that cancel scope or if the timeout expires.
So you have a five-second window to close any resources that need closing.
>> Got it. So you could do that,
say, within your exception handler or something, right?
- Yeah.
- Okay.
- Or actually, I think finally,
a finally block might be the best place to do that.
But depending on the audio use case, of course.
- Yeah, of course.
Okay, very interesting.
So all this stuff about task groups
and scheduling tasks and canceling them,
that's very Trio-esque,
but it's also just a small part of any I/O.
There's a bunch of other features and capabilities here
that are probably worth going into.
Some cool stuff about taking AsyncIO code
and converting it to threads or converting threads to AsyncIO,
and similarly for subprocesses.
But let's maybe just talk real quick about the synchronization primitives.
These are things like events, semaphores.
Maybe not everyone knows what events and semaphores are in this context.
Give us a quick rundown.
Well, these are pretty much the same
as they are on async I/O.
Many of them use just the async I/O counterparts
straight up.
So events are a mechanism for telling another task
that something happened,
something significant happened,
and they need to react to it.
It's often used to coordinate tasks.
So one thing doesn't happen before something else
has happened in another task.
- Yeah, yeah, there might be two tasks running
and one says, I'm gonna wait until this file appears
and the other one's going to eventually create the file,
right, but you don't know the order.
- Yeah.
- So one option is to just do polling,
like, well, I'm gonna asyncio.sleep for a little while
and then see if the file's there,
try to access it, you know, and do that over and over.
A much more responsive way and deterministic way
would be to say, I'm going to wait on an event to be set.
And the thing that creates a file will create the file
and then set the event, which will kind of release
that other task to carry on, right?
- Right.
- Okay.
Moving on, semaphores are mechanism for saying
that you have this limited, you have a number limit.
let's say a connection pool or something.
And you want to specify that whenever
some part of the code needs access to this resource,
it needs to acquire the semaphore.
So you set a limit and then each time
that's entered as a semaphore, it decrements the counter.
And when you hit the limit,
then it starts blocking until something else releases it.
- Right, so people might be familiar with threadlocks
or asyncios equivalent,
where you say only one thing can access this at a time.
So you don't end up with deadlocks
or race conditions and so on.
But semaphores are kind of like that,
but they allow multiple things to happen.
Say maybe your database only allows 10 connections
or you don't want it to have more than 10 connections.
So you could have a semaphore that says
it has a limit of 10 and you have to acquire it
to talk to the database.
That doesn't mean it stops multiple things
from happening at once.
It just doesn't let it become a thousand at once, right?
- Exactly.
- I really like this idea.
And you know, I was showing some people
some web scraping work with asyncio,
where it's like, oh, let's go create a whole bunch
of ACPX requests or whatever type of requests,
something asynchronous, talking to some servers
to download some code, and if it's a limited set,
no big deal, but if you have thousands of URLs to go hit,
well then how do you manage not killing your network
or overloading that?
The semaphore actually would be perfect.
- So for people listening, the way that you do it
is you create a task group and then just you pass
the semaphore to start soon.
That's really clean.
And any I/O takes care of just making sure it gets access
and then runs and then gives it back?
How's that work?
- I'm not sure what sort of answer you are expecting,
but as I recall, this current implementation
is actually using the underlying async libraries events.
So there are actually methods to acquire
and release the semaphores.
And it just implements an async context manager
that acquires it at the beginning
and releases it at the end.
There's an event involved for notifying any awaiting task
that it has a semaphore slot available.
- Yeah, it's super clean.
And the fact that you don't have to write that code,
you just say this semaphore is associated with this task
through your task group?
- Actually, actually semaphores are not associated
with a particular task.
That's what capacity limiters are for.
- Okay.
So you can release a semaphore from another task
while capacity limiters are bound to the specific task
that you acquired them in.
- Okay.
Yeah, in the semaphore example, was it being passed?
Oh yeah, it's just being passed as an argument, isn't it?
To the task and it's up to the task to use it.
I see, okay, so this other concept, the capacity limiter.
- Yeah, so this is from Trio.
It's very similar to Semaphore.
So you can actually set the borrower,
but in most circumstances,
you want the current task to be the borrower.
And limiters are actually used in other parts of any I/O
as they are in Trio, for example,
to limit the number of threads that you allocate
or limit number of subprocesses that you spawn.
- Sure.
- But they're using-- - You don't have too many threads,
you don't have too many subprocesses, right?
You've got a thousand jobs and you just for each thing a job
start it in a subprocess, you're gonna have a bad time.
- Right, so as documentation says,
they are quite like semaphores,
but they have additional safeguards.
- Such as?
- Well, they check that the borrow is the same.
- Okay, yeah, that makes sense.
- By default, they check that the task they use
for both acquiring or releasing are the same.
- Yeah, nice.
Okay, well, I didn't know about capacity limiters.
That's fantastic.
I love the idea.
Okay, let's jump over to,
You talked about the threads and the subprocesses.
Let's talk about this thread capability
that you have here.
This is very nice.
The anyio.toThread, what is this?
- Yeah, so this is also modeled based on Trio.
It's basically anyio's way of doing WordPress threads.
So in async.io, you have these thread pool executors
that do the same as run sync.
Async.io's API is somewhat problematic
because you have basically two methods.
So you have, I forget the older one.
The newer one is called to_thread.
The first one was, was it run in executor or whatever it was.
They both had their own issues.
ToTread doesn't allow you to specify any thread pool, so it always uses the default thread pool.
And there is no way to add that to the API because it was done in such a manner.
Then the older function does have this parameter at the front.
But the problem is that it doesn't propagate context variables, unlike the newer toThread function.
So context variables, if you don't know about them, they are a fairly recent addition to Python.
- They are basically thread locals.
Are you familiar with thread locals?
They are thread locals but--
- Yeah, but let me just make a comment
for people who don't know.
Like thread local variables, which also exist in Python,
allow you to say, I'm gonna have a variable,
maybe it's even a global variable,
and it's thread local, which means every thread
that sees it gets its own copy of the variable,
where it points to and what value it is.
And so that way you can initialize something
at the start of a thread.
If you have multiple threads,
they can all kind of have their own copy
so they don't have to share it.
But that falls down because asyncio event loops,
when you await those, all that stuff is running
on one thread, just the one that's running the loop, right?
So that's what you're talking about is that equivalent,
but for asyncio, right?
- Yeah, so quantified variables
are a much more advanced concept.
They basically, yeah, as you said,
set locals for async tasks.
So--
- That sounds very tricky.
I've thought about that.
I have no idea how to implement that.
So that's pretty cool.
I guess Python would know.
- Yeah, the thing is the event loop,
when it starts running a task,
when it switches between tasks,
it runs that callback within that context
that the task is tied to.
And when you start to work with worker threads,
then you need to see the same context variables
in that worker set, right?
- Right.
- So this has been somewhat of a problem
because that older method in AsyncIO
for running worker threads,
it doesn't propagate these variables.
but the newer function to thread does.
But then you can specify which thread pool you want to use.
- Right, okay, so it's similar to the built-in one,
but it gives you more capability
to determine where you might run it.
- Yeah, so basically when you call run sync,
it allows you to specify a limiter.
and it uses the default limiter,
which has a capacity of 40 threads.
- 40?
- Yeah, 40.
- That seems like a pretty good default.
Much more than that, and you end up with memory and--
- Yeah, it's most arbitrarily set to 40,
but then Nathaniel and Trio, so I just followed suit.
- Sure.
Yeah, so basically, if you've got some function
that is not async, but you want to be able to await it
so that basically run it on a background thread.
Here you just say, anyio.toThread,
and then .runSync, and you give it the function to call.
And now you can await it,
and it runs on a background thread in this thread pool,
which is really nice.
- Yeah, that's how it works.
- So one thing that I'm noticing a lot in the API here
for any I/O is often, now for the synchronous functions,
it's completely obvious why you wouldn't do it,
but even in the sort of creating tasks ones,
what I'm noticing is that even the async functions,
you pass the function name and then the arguments
to like start soon, as opposed to saying,
call the function, passing the arguments
and getting a coroutine back.
Why does it work that way?
It seems like it would make it a little less easy to use,
like, say, type hints and auto-complete
and the various niceties of calling functions in editors.
- Yeah, there was a good reason for that.
I can't remember that offhand,
but at the very least, it's consistent
with the synchronous counterparts, like run sync.
- Yeah, okay, cool.
All right, so we have this stuff about threads,
And you have the toThread.
Yeah, also fromThread, which is nice.
What's fromThread to?
- Yeah, so when you are in a worker thread
and you occasionally need to call something
in the event loop thread,
then you need to use this fromThread.run
to run stuff on event loop thread.
- Right, because the worker method is not async,
otherwise you would just await it, right?
It's a regular function.
In that regular function, you want
to be able to await a thing.
You can kind of reverse back.
I see.
That's an interesting bidirectional aspect.
All right, subprocesses.
We all know about the GIL, how Python doesn't necessarily
love doing computational work across processes.
Tell us about the subprocess equivalent.
Yeah, so this is a really relatively easy way to both run a task in a subprocess and then opening arbitrary executables for running asynchronously.
I think Kayo has similar facilities for running async processes, but yeah, these async subprocess
facilities are not really up to par with, say, multiprocessing, which has some additional
niceties like, I think, shared queues and other synchronization primitives. But they are still
pretty useful as they are.
Yeah.
So basically, you can just say, sorry, you can just say any any IO dot to process run sync, and you give it a function. And now you can await that sub process. multiprocessing.
Yeah, so there are usual caveats like because they don't share memory, then
you have to serialize the arguments and that could be a problem in some cases.
Sure, so basically it pickles the arguments and the return values and sends them over.
Yeah, it could be even so that the arguments are pickable but the return value is not
which obviously causes some confusion. Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
People maybe hear that pickling is bad and you can have all sorts of challenges of like
code injection and whatnot from pickling through security stuff. This, I would think, is not really
subject to that because it's you calling the function directly.
And right, it's like,
- There's no way to inject anything bad.
- Yeah, exactly.
It's all the multi-processing that's handled in it anyway.
So it should be okay.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, cool.
Another one that is pretty exciting
has to do with file support.
So we have open in Python,
you would say with open something as F, right?
But that's, there's no async equivalent, right?
Yeah, so these file facilities are really just a convenience that wraps around these file objects.
So if somebody wants to know, there is no actual async file I/O happening, because that's not really a thing on Linux,
and even on Windows it has terrible problems.
Okay. So what's happening with this ini.io.open file?
Yeah, so it opens a file in a thread, and then this opens,
this starts an AsyncContextManager that on exit closes the file.
This file object--
It also closes the thread, I guess, right?
Well, it uses throw away threads, basically from the thread pool.
All right, I see.
So it'll use a thread to open the file and get the file handle and then throw away the
thread and then return to the pool.
Which is much better than creating it and throwing it away completely.
Yeah, so also that read call is done in the thread.
>> Okay. So it just is a fancy layer over top of ThreadPool.
>> Yeah.
>> But it's really, really nice.
You write basically exactly the same code that you would
write with regular open and a context manager,
but the async version.
Although I got to say
that the opening part of creating a context manager here,
you say async with,
which people are probably used to,
and then async with await open file.
- Yeah, the reason for that is because you can just do
a wait open file and then go about your business
and then manually close the file.
So I'm not sure if there's a more convenient way to do this.
I might be open to adding that to any IO,
but for the moment, this is how you do it.
- Yeah, you could probably wrap it in some kind of class
or something that's synchronous,
but then has an A enter, but yeah, it's,
I'm not sure if it's totally worth it,
but yeah, that's quite the statement there.
And then the other area that's interesting about this is
if you wanna loop over it line for line,
instead of doing a regular for loop,
you can do an async for line and file
and then read it asynchronously line by line, right?
- Yeah, so the A next method just gets the next line
in the worker thread.
- Mm-hmm, yeah.
Now this is fantastic.
So people who are working with files,
they definitely can check this out.
And also related to that is you have
an asynchronous pathlib path.
- Yeah, that's a fairly recent addition.
- Yeah, it looks great.
So you have like an async iterator,
you have an async, is it a file,
async read text all built into the path,
which is like what's built into regular path,
but not asynchronous.
Yeah, quite nice.
Let's see, what else?
We're getting kind of short on time here.
What else would you like to highlight here?
- I would like to highlight the streaming framework here,
'cause it's one of the unique things in EIO.
- Okay, yeah, let's talk about it.
- Trio has its channels and then it has sockets and whatnot,
but any I/O has something that Trio doesn't have.
And really, AsyncIO has some kind of streaming abstraction,
but not quite on this level.
So in any I/O, we have a streaming
abstract base class hierarchy.
We have these object streams and byte streams.
The difference between these are that object streams can have anything like integers, strings,
any arbitrary objects, and byte streams have only bytes, and they are modeled according
to TCP.
So, with byte streams, you can send a number of bytes or receive bytes, but they might
be chunked differently.
These are abstract streams, so you can say,
build a library that wraps another stream.
Say you build an SSH client that creates a tunnel
and it exposes that as a stream.
So as so long as you are able to consume a stream,
then you don't have to care how the stream is,
how the stream works internally
or what other streams it wraps.
A good example of a stream wrapper is the TLS support.
That's right there.
So TLS support in any IL can wrap any existing stream
that gives you bytes,
even if it's an object,
whether it's an object or byte stream.
So it does the handshake using the standard library.
Actually, standard library contains this
sense I/O protocol for TLS.
Sense I/O protocol, if you are not aware of it,
it's basically a state machine without any actual I/O calls.
It's a very neat protocol implementation
that lets you add whatever kind of I/O layer
you want on top of that.
So this is what ADR uses to implement TLS.
So you have both a listener and a connect
and a TLS wrapper.
So any kind of TLS,
you can even do TLS on top of TLS if you like.
Not sure that's useful, but you can do it.
- It's super encrypted.
So this is very flexible.
We have all sorts of streams,
even these unreliable streams,
which are modeled based on UDP.
- Really, okay.
- Yeah.
So UDP is implemented by using these unreliable streams.
I don't think there are any more unreliable streams
implementations on UDP.
But yeah, yeah, there are,
I'm really proud of this streaming class hierarchy
and it's too bad that there are no cool projects
to show off this system,
but maybe in the future we will have.
Another thing that I would like to highlight
is a system of typed attributes.
That has been really useful.
- Before we moved on to the type attributes,
let me just ask you real quickly,
can I use these streams and these bi-directional streams
where you create like a send stream and a receive stream,
can we use those across like multi-processing
or to coordinate threads?
- Sadly, sadly no.
Sadly no.
- Okay.
- This memory object stream is,
as they call it in Trio Channel,
This is one of the most useful pieces of any I/O, really.
I use this every day at work.
So these are basically cues on steroids.
Unlike async I/O cues,
unlike async I/O cues, you can actually close these,
you can clone them.
So you can have multiple tasks waiting
to receive something, like workers.
We have multiple senders.
- Like a producer consumer where,
or like some things are put in,
but there's like five workers
who might grab a job and work on it.
- Yeah, you can have five consumers
or five producers all talking to each other.
Yeah, and then you can just iterate over them.
Also not possible with queues.
And then you can close the queues, sorry, streams,
so that when you iterate on them,
if all the other ints are closed,
then the iterator just ends.
- Oh, wow, okay.
So if the send stream goes away,
then the receive stream is done?
It's at the end? - Yeah.
- That's fantastic, actually.
I really like that.
- Yeah, I think this is also coming to--
- Go ahead, sorry.
- I think I, oh.
I think this is also coming to the standard library.
- Nice.
All right, last thing we probably have time for here
that you wanted to highlight is typed attributes.
What's the story with typed attributes?
- Yeah, so if you knew about the async.io extras in,
I think they have both in protocols and streams.
For example, with TLS, you want to get the certificate
from the stream, like if you have negotiated a TLS stream,
you want to get the client certificate, right?
So this you can do, but this is a type set way to do it.
You can add any arbitrary extra attributes to a stream,
just declare it in the extra attributes method.
But the niftiest part here is that it can work
across RAP streams.
So a very good example is that,
say you have a stream that is based on HTTP,
you have an HTTP server and you have a stream,
let's say web sockets,
then you want to get the client IP address.
Well, usually you may have a front end web server
like Nginx at the front.
So normally what you would get
when you ask for an IP address
is that you actually get the IP address of the server.
So what you need to do is look at the headers.
So this is something you can do transparently
with this type attributes.
So basically the wrapping stream
that understands HTTP,
you can have that handle the request for the IP address,
the remote IP address and have it look at the headers
and look for a forwarded header and return that instead.
- Nice.
Yeah, so for, let me see if I got this right here.
So people are probably familiar with Pydantic
and Pydantic allows you to create a class
and it says what types are in the class
and the names and so on.
and those serialize out a JSON message.
It sounds to me like what this is built for
is when I'm talking met binary messages
over a stream like a TCP stream,
I can create a similar class that says,
oh, I expect a message that is a string and then a float,
read that out of the stream.
Is that right?
- Yeah, a good example here is,
if you go back to the streams part,
Text streams.
Okay.
So, this is something that translates between bytes and streams on the fly.
So, this is a perfect trivial example of a stream prepper.
Okay, yes, you have a text receive stream that will do the byte decoding.
Yeah.
Yeah, very nice.
And you don't have to care like what's downstream of that.
And even if you have three layers on top, you can just still ask for, say, client remote
IP address.
If there's a network stream somewhere downstream, that's the stream that will give you your
answer. Cool. Yeah, the stream work here is really nice. There's a lot of things that are nice.
The coordinating the task groups, the coordinating limitations like the with a limit, limiter,
capacity, capacity limiter. A lot of cool building blocks on top of it and also the fact that this
runs against or integrates with regular AsyncIO
means you don't have to completely change
your whole system in order to use it, right?
>>Yeah.
>>Very cool.
All right, well, I think we're about out of time
to talk about ADIO.
Do you want to take 30 seconds and just give the elevator
pitch for SQL A Code Gen?
This is a really exciting project that you created here.
Yeah, this is one of those side projects that are on the verge of a major release.
So what this does is it takes an existing database, it connects to an existing database,
reflects the schema from that, and then writes model code for you.
The next major version even supports data classes
and other kinds of formats.
- The SQL model one is the one that's most exciting for me
because that'll give you Pydanic models
that use the SQL model, which is very exciting.
Yeah, so nice.
I mean, think if you're a consultant
or you've, you talked about Java earlier, right?
Imagine you've got like a Java code base
and you wanna do a proof of concept in Python
and SQL model or SQL alchemy.
And somebody says, well, why don't you try building
a simple version that talks to our database?
And if that thing has like 100 tables
and complicated relationships, it's no fun to sit down.
Like a big portion of that project
might be just modeling the database.
And here I can just say, SQL echo gen,
connect to Postgres, boom, outcomes, SQLAlchemy classes.
That's a huge jumpstart for getting started,
or if you're a consultant jumping into a new project.
- Yeah, exactly.
If you have a really large database,
and this will save little hours of your time.
- At least hours, yes.
And a lot of frustration, right?
Because with SQLAlchemy, you've got to have the model
match the database just right,
and this will do that for you.
Yeah.
OK, super cool project.
TypeGuard is another one you have.
Not super complicated, but an interesting capability
to grab on.
>>Jani: Yeah, also one of those that are on major--
version of major release.
I sadly have not had enough time to finish the next major
version.
And then there's, of course, Python 3.11,
which brings a whole bunch of new feature
that I have not been able to yet incorporate into TypeGuard.
And sadly, I also have not started using it myself.
It's a sad story really.
But the premise is that you have this pytest plugin
you have this pytest plugin and you activate it during the test run and then
in addition to you know static type checking your application which you
usually do with mypy, PyWrite or what have you, you can also do a runtime type
checking because the static tools don't always see the correct types.
Well, and you might not be in control of that, right?
You might write a library, your library might have types declared on what it's supposed
to take.
The person consuming your library has no requirement to run mypy and they have no requirement to
make sure what they typed matches what you said you expect.
And because they're hints, they're not compiled options in Python, at runtime, you might get
something you don't expect, even though you put a type there.
>> Yeah, exactly.
So this is how you get a runtime assurance that you have the right type there.
>> Nice.
So all you do with this type guard library is you put an @typechecked decorator on a
function and then...
Go ahead.
What else do I got to do?
the best way would be to use the import hook.
There's an import hook that will automatically
add these decorators during the import,
so you don't have to alter your code at all.
There are some open issues with that import hook,
like somebody reported that this import
hook is installed too late, that the modules in question
were already imported.
So that's something I have yet to fix or find a workaround for.
But that's the idea.
>>Right.
So you can either use the decorator
and be somewhat guarded about how you're doing it
and only apply it to certain parts,
like say your public API,
or you could just say install import hook
and then everything that gets imported
gets wrapped in the type check decorator.
And what that does is it looks at the type hints
and the declared return value and will raise an exception.
If say that your function takes an integer
and it's passed a string, that becomes a runtime error.
- Right, or you can just issue a warning.
- Sure, the warning may be nice, but it's still,
I think it's pretty cool.
You can opt into having Python type hints
become enforced, basically.
- Yeah, what I use this for is in the Asphalt.
When I configure, when I accept the configuration
for a component, I use this decorator,
or rather an assert, to check that the types are correct.
so I don't raise any mysterious warning type errors
or value errors further down the line,
or even worse, at runtime.
- Sure.
Okay, that's cool.
There is one of the features of Asphalt or Highlights
is runtime type checking for development and testing
to fail early when functions are called
with incompatible arguments
and can be disabled for zero overhead.
So it sounds like you're maybe doing an import hook
in development mode, and that's handling all this for you.
Is that right?
- Well, actually, in this current version,
I'm using the assert.
So in case you didn't know, when you have asserts,
they are normally run without any switches to Python.
But if you run Python without the debug mode,
then asserts are not compiled into bytecode.
So just by using this switch,
you can disable these potentially expensive asserts.
- I see.
Yeah, okay, I didn't know that.
I'm familiar with that from C and C#
and other compiled languages with their pragmas
and that type of thing,
but didn't realize that about Python asserts.
- Yeah, there's this one thing that,
actually, if you have this code,
if under debug, and there's a bunch of code under that block,
that whole block gets omitted from the compiled code
if you run Python with the debug mode disabled.
- Okay, yeah, very cool.
All right, Alex, well,
those are some cool additional projects.
I feel like the SQL A code gen,
we almost could spend a whole bunch of other time on it.
Another one is the AP scheduler.
Again, could almost be its own show,
but we're out of time for this one.
So thanks so much for being here.
Now, before you get out of here,
I've got the two final questions to ask you.
If you're gonna write some Python code,
what editor are you to use?
- Well, I've been looking at the different editors
available and so far PyCharm wins, hands down.
So it has so many of these intelligent features
and what have you that,
for example, I use its database features
to browse through my database.
I use its refactoring features to change my code
relatively safely.
And its Docker support gives me auto-completion.
The list goes on and on and on
And most of these ideas are not nearly as sophisticated.
- I agree.
Excellent one.
Now, a notable PyPI package.
I mean, we talked about that one.
You can recommend any of these we talked about,
or you can say something else that's interesting.
Sure.
- Well, I think I already mentioned Trio,
But this is a difficult question, really.
Maybe poetry.
- Okay, yeah, poetry.
- Yeah, so poetry is something that I use
for my application at work.
It's the closest thing in Python to, say, yarn.
So I manage the dependencies
and lock down the dependencies using Poetry.
It's quite handy for that.
There are some, I have some issues with Poetry
like when I just need to update one dependency,
it updates them all and small issues like that.
But other than that, it's great.
- Nice, yeah, it looks really great.
I know a lot of people are loving Poetry.
It's a good recommendation there.
Right, final call to action.
people are interested in any IO, how do they get started?
- Well, this is somewhat of a tutorial there.
I really don't have a really long tutorial on like Trio.
So I'm heavily leaning on Trio's documentation here
because any IO has such a similar design to Trio
then a lot of Trio's manual can be used
to draw parallels to any I/O.
You can almost use Trio's documentation,
the tutorial to learn how any I/O works.
- Yeah, it's highly inspired, right?
- Right, and if anything else,
then you should just come to Gitter.
I think there's a link,
getting help at the bottom.
- Okay, yeah.
So there's a GitHub link, and I'm usually available there.
>> Great.
OK, yeah, very, very nice.
And I'm guessing you accept contributions?
>> Sure.
>> Yeah.
So yeah, let's see.
Over here, we've got--
yeah, what is that, 33 contributors?
So yeah, excellent.
If people want to contribute to the project,
and maybe that's code, or maybe even they
could put together a tutorial or something like that
if they're interested.
- Maybe, yeah.
- Yeah, perhaps, okay.
Excellent, well, thank you for all the cool libraries
and take the time to come share them with us.
- Thanks for having me.
- Yeah, you bet.
Bye, thanks everyone for listening.
- Bye.
[BLANK_AUDIO]